Document device statuses (#1410)
balena-io/docs: pages/learn/manage/device-statuses.md

---
title: Device statuses
excerpt: Determine the status and connectivity of a device
---

# Device statuses

The application overview page shows the status of each device in the application.

<img src="/img/common/main_dashboard/application_device_status.png" alt="Application device status" width="40%" >

> Each device can have one of the following statuses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each device can have one of the following statuses:
```

| Status            | Description                                                                                  |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Online            | The device is online and is connected to either the VPN or has recent API communications.    |

Reviewer 2: The `either` here sounds a bit too exclusive as a word to me. 
How about adding a `or both` at the end?
On the other hand I'm not a native English speaker...

Author: Yes, we can just drop the either here as not correct.

> | Configuring       | The device is applying a configuration update.                                               |

Reviewer 2: More context: Devices show as configuring during the provisioning process for flasher device types, and during host os updates (please give this a try).

See: https://github.com/balena-os/meta-balena/blob/006bc19161053147f47fa12e4cc063da5011215a/meta-balena-common/recipes-support/resin-init/resin-init-flasher/resin-init-flasher#L144
See: https://github.com/balena-os/resin-os-misc/blob/7f0edcb78ed191465b5686086c0ab0260ec8421d/resinhup/run-resinhup.sh
See: https://github.com/balena-io/balena-proxy/blob/79c9b2d6f0c90bd6945e0ed7a65d93b87c1fdbc0/src/services/actions-backend/actions/scripts/upgrade-1.x.sh

| Updating          | The device is updating to a new application release.                                         |
| Offline           | The device is offline and is not connected to VPN and has not any recent API communications. |

> | Post Provisioning | The device has been [provisioned][provisioned] but has not yet come online.                  |

Reviewer 2: Correct :+1: 
To provide the full context: (for flasher device types) the flasher sets the device to this state, right before it issues a device restart.

See: https://github.com/balena-os/meta-balena/blob/006bc19161053147f47fa12e4cc063da5011215a/meta-balena-common/recipes-support/resin-init/resin-init-flasher/resin-init-flasher#L144

> | Inactive          | The device has been [deactivated][deactivated].                                              |

Reviewer 2: Just FYI that deactivation is not the only way to end up on this state.
A pre-provisioned device (with `balena device register`.) shows up as inactive until it first connects to the API.

Author: Perfect, I can link to the [preregistering section](https://www.balena.io/docs/learn/more/masterclasses/advanced-cli/#52-preregistering-a-device) of the masterclass for that too.

## Device connectivity

![Device connectivity indicators](/img/common/main_dashboard/device_status.png)

> In addition to the device status, there are indicators to show if the device is currently connected to the VPN (checkmark icon) and has recent API communications (heartbeat icon). These indicators can be used to identify common issues, such as a firewall blocking VPN traffic or an inability of the device to reach the API endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the device status, there are indicators to show if the device is currently connected to the VPN (checkmark icon) and has recent API communications (heartbeat icon). These indicators can be used to identify common issues, such as a firewall blocking VPN traffic or an inability of the device to communicate with the balenaCloud API.
```

> For example, if the device is connected to the API only, indicated by a status of Online (Heartbeat Only), you may still see logs being sent and indicates that VPN traffic is blocked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, in case a device is connected to the API only, indicated by a status of Online (Heartbeat Only), you may still see logs being sent and indicates that VPN traffic is blocked.
```
I thought that it glues better together with the next part (`indicated by ...`).
Again, not a native English speaker.

> For example, if the device is connected to the API only, indicated by a status of Online (Heartbeat Only), you may still see logs being sent and indicates that VPN traffic is blocked.

Reviewer 2: How about splitting this, so that we don't have a single sentence paragraph?
```suggestion
For example, if the device is connected to the API only, indicated by a status of Online (Heartbeat Only), you may still see logs being sent. This case indicates that the device is unable to connect to the balenaCloud VPN.
```

> **Note:** If the device is powered off or loses all network connectivity, it will remain in the Online (Heartbeat Only) state for an extended time based on the device [API polling interval](https://www.balena.io/docs/learn/manage/configuration/#variable-list).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** If the device is powered off or loses all network connectivity, it will remain in the Online (Heartbeat Only) state for an extended time based on the device [API polling interval][poll-interval]
```

Author: Yikes, nice catch, thanks!

---
title: Device statuses
excerpt: Determine the status and connectivity of a device
---

# Device statuses

The application overview page shows the status of each device in the application.

<img src="/img/common/main_dashboard/application_device_status.png" alt="Application device status" width="40%" >

Each device can have one of the following statuses:

| Status            | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Online            | The device is online and is connected to the VPN or has recent API communications.                                                                                                                                            |

> | Configuring       | The device is applying a configuration update. Additionally, this status is displayed during [host OS updates]host-os-updates, and for devices that require flashing, during the [provisioning][device-provisioning] process. |

Reviewer 2: @garethtdavies I actually provided the extra context just so that you have the full picture to write the descriptions.
I wasn't requesting mentioning all the pre/post-provisioning process details. Sorry if I confused you.

For example here it could be as simple as
```suggestion
| Configuring       | The device is applying OS configuration. |
```

If you still think we should mention the details (which I think we don't need to be that verbose here), maybe first mention the provisioning part and the os update later, so that they are in a sequence order.

Author: Ah, perfect yes I did get confused by that and I agree it's overkill. I'll update it and thanks for providing that additional context 👍
